docs: life and times of a Gatsby build (#17915)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/life-and-times-of-a-gatsby-build.md

The `gatsby develop` command doesn't perform some of the build steps that the `gatsby build` command does, but starts up a development server that you can use to preview your site in the browser -- like a runtime. When you run `gatsby build` (build time) there won't be a browser available, so your site needs to be capable of protecting calls to browser based APIs.

To gain a greater understanding of what happens when you run either command, it can be helpful to look at the information that Gatsby is reporting back and break it down.

### Understanding gatsby develop (runtime)

Using `gatsby develop` runs a server in the background enabling useful features like hot reloading and Gatsby’s data explorer.

> Gatsby develop is optimized for rapid feedback and extra debugging information. The output of running `gatsby develop` in a fresh install of the Gatsby default starter looks like this:

Reviewer: i suggest this: 
```suggestion
The Gatsby development server is optimized for rapid feedback and extra debugging information. The output of running `gatsby develop` in a fresh install of the Gatsby default starter looks like this:
```

or this:

```suggestion
`gatsby develop` is optimized for rapid feedback and extra debugging information. The output of running `gatsby develop` in a fresh install of the Gatsby default starter looks like this:
```

success building schema - 0.266 s
success createPages - 0.014 s
success createPagesStatefully - 0.067 s
success onPreExtractQueries - 0.017 s
success update schema - 0.034 s
success extract queries from components - 0.222 s
success write out requires - 0.044 s
success write out redirect data - 0.014 s
success Build manifest and related icons - 0.110 s
success onPostBootstrap - 0.130 s
⠀
info bootstrap finished - 3.674 s
⠀
success run static queries - 0.057 s — 3/3 89.08 queries/second
success run page queries - 0.033 s — 5/5 347.81 queries/second
success start webpack server - 1.707 s — 1/1 6.06 pages/second
```

You can maybe take guesses at what some of the steps are doing, but others require context of Gatsby internals to make sense of (don't worry, the rest of this guide will give more explanations).

### Understanding gatsby build (build time)

Gatsby build is made for when you’ve added the finishing touches to your site and everything looks great. `gatsby build` creates a version of your site with optimizations like packaging up your site’s config, data, and code, and creating all the HTML that eventually gets [rehydrated](/docs/glossary#hydration) into a React app.

> 

Reviewer: maybe add it here:

```suggestion
You can run and test the output from `gatsby build` with the `gatsby serve` command. 

```

maybe additional: Compared to the `gatsby develop` the `gatsby serve` only rely on the build, so if you update the code you need rerun the `gatsby build`. 

or maybe this can be an own section: "Differences between `gatsby develop` and `gatsby serve`:

success initialize cache - 0.034 s
success copy gatsby files - 0.099 s
success onPreBootstrap - 0.034 s
success source and transform nodes - 0.121 s
success Add explicit types - 0.025 s
success Add inferred types - 0.144 s
success Processing types - 0.110 s
success building schema - 0.365 s
success createPages - 0.016 s
success createPagesStatefully - 0.079 s
success onPreExtractQueries - 0.025 s
success update schema - 0.041 s
success extract queries from components - 0.333 s
success write out requires - 0.020 s
success write out redirect data - 0.019 s
success Build manifest and related icons - 0.141 s
success onPostBootstrap - 0.164 s
⠀
info bootstrap finished - 6.932 s
⠀
success run static queries - 0.166 s — 3/3 20.90 queries/second
success Generating image thumbnails — 6/6 - 1.059 s
success Building production JavaScript and CSS bundles - 8.050 s
success Rewriting compilation hashes - 0.021 s
success run page queries - 0.034 s — 4/4 441.23 queries/second
success Building static HTML for pages - 0.852 s — 4/4 23.89 pages/second
info Done building in 16.143999152 sec
```

## Differences between develop and build

So what's the difference?

> If you compare the outputs of the two commands (develop vs build), you can see that everything (with the exception of deleting html and css files) up until the line that says `info bootstrap finished` are the same. However, `gatsby build` runs some additional steps to prepare your site to go live after the bootstrap phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you compare the outputs of the two commands (`gatsby develop` vs `gatsby build`), you can see that everything (with the exception of deleting html and css files) up until the line that says `info bootstrap finished` are the same. However, `gatsby build` runs some additional steps to prepare your site to go live after the bootstrap phase.
```

The following output shows the differences between the above two examples:

> ```diff:title=develop-vs-build

Author: Good point, kind of breaks the convention and is explained in the text.

> ```diff:title=develop-vs-build

Author: ```suggestion
```diff
```

There is only one difference in the bootstrap phase where HTML and CSS is deleted to prevent problems with previous builds. In the build phase, the build command skips setting up a dev server and goes into compiling the assets.

By omitting these later steps, `gatsby develop` can speed up your ability to make edits with features like [hot module replacement](/docs/glossary#hot-module-replacement). It also saves time with the more CPU intensive processes that aren't necessary to perform while in develoment.

A [cache](/docs/glossary#cache) is also used that is invalidated on every change to a `gatsby-*.js` file (like `gatsby-node.js`, or `gatsby-config.js`) or a dependency.

## What happens when you run `gatsby build`?

To see the code where many of these processes are happening, refer to the code and comments in the [`build`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/packages/gatsby/src/commands/build.js) and [`bootstrap`](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/packages/gatsby/src/bootstrap/index.js) files of the repository.

> A Node process is what is powering things behind the scenes when you run the `gatsby build` command. The process of converting assets and pages into HTML that can be rendered in a browser by a [server-side](docs/glossary#server-side) language like Node.js is referred to as server-side rendering. Since Gatsby is building everything ahead of time, this creates your entire site with all of the data your pages need all at once. Then when the site is deployed, it doesn't need to be running on a server because everything has been gathered up and combined by Gatsby.

Reviewer: `it doesn't need to be running on a server`

maybe this can be confusing for new users, because a user expect the website `on a server` 

should explain that it not need calculations on server when a page is requested and deliver only plain text files.

PS: i don't know what are the best wording here to explain this

Reviewer: you implemented marcys suggestion i can close this

> **Note**: because Gatsby apps still run React in the browser, you can still fetch data from other sources at [runtime](/docs/glossary#runtime) like you would in a normal React app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: because Gatsby apps still run React in the browser, you can still fetch data from other sources at [runtime](/docs/glossary#runtime) like you would in a normal React app.
```

Reviewer: is resolved. i close this conversation

<LayerModel initialLayer="Build" />

Like the console output demonstrates in the section above, there are 2 main steps that take place when you run a build, the `bootstrap` phase, and the `build` phase (which can be seen finishing in the console output when you run develop or build).

```shell
info bootstrap finished - 3.674 s
...
info Done building in 16.143999152 sec
```

At a high-level, what happens during the whole bootstrap and build process is:

1. nodes are sourced from whatever sources you defined with plugins as well as in your `gatsby-node`
2. a schema is inferred from the nodes
3. pages are created based off JavaScript in your site or in installed themes
4. queries are extracted and run to provide data for all pages
5. static files are created and bundled up

For an introduction to what happens at each step throughout the process from the output above, refer to the sections below.

### Steps of the bootstrap phase

The steps of the bootstrap phase are shared between develop and build (with only one exception in the `delete html and css files from previous builds` step), and are:

1. `open and validate gatsby-configs`

> The `gatsby-config` file for the site and any installed themes are opened, ensuring that a function or object is exported for each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `/gatsby-config.js` file for the site and any installed themes are opened, ensuring that a function or object is exported for each.
```

6. `copy gatsby files`

Copies site files into the cache in the `.cache` folder.

7. `onPreBootstrap`

Calls the [`onPreBootstrap` node API](/docs/node-apis/#onPreBootstrap) in your site or plugins where it is implemented.

8. `source and transform nodes`

Creates nodes from your site and all plugins implementing the [`sourceNodes` API](/docs/node-apis/#sourceNodes), and warns about plugins that aren't creating any nodes. Nodes created by source or transformer plugins are cached.

Nodes created at this stage are considered top level nodes, meaning they don't have a parent node that they are derived from.

9. `Add explicit types`

Adds types to the GraphQL schema for nodes that you have defined explicitly with Gatsby's [schema optimization APIs](/docs/schema-customization/#explicitly-defining-data-types).

10. `Add inferred types`

All other nodes not already defined are inspected and have types [inferred](/docs/schema-customization/#automatic-type-inference) by Gatsby.

11. `Processing types`

> Composes 3rd party schema types, children fields, custom resolve functions, set fields, and print type definitions into the GraphQL schema.

Reviewer: with `print` i expected somehow in the console ...
```suggestion
Composes 3rd party schema types, children fields, custom resolve functions, set fields, and save type definitions into the GraphQL schema.
```

12. `building schema`

Imports the composed GraphQL schema and builds it.

13. `createPages`

Calls the [`createPages` API](/docs/node-apis/#createPages) for your site and all plugins implementing it, like when you [create pages programatically](/docs/programmatically-create-pages-from-data/) in your `gatsby-node.js`.

Plugins can handle the [`onCreatePage` event](/docs/node-apis/#onCreatePage) at this point for use cases like manipulating the path of pages.

> 

Reviewer: maybe add here a ntde, that when you use `createPage` in a `onCreatePage` then it is not called again to avoid recursive death loops. (i hope this is right as i remember there was this behaviour)

Author: I think this could be good to include in the doc that the paragraph links to, then people would find it there too. Was this an issue someone brought up or something you've run into yourself?

Reviewer: i remember someone had it recently...

Reviewer: found it: https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/17498#issuecomment-529442071

Reviewer 2: why not use [this](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/creating-and-modifying-pages/) that demonstrates what are those hooks.

Author: Thanks for finding that reference @muescha, that's really helpful! I added a note to the API reference to mention when it won't run, then that reference links to the creating pages link @jonniebigodes mentions, so I think that's a good logical path for people to follow to find that info!

Author: Thanks for finding that @muescha! I added a note about when it won't be called, then the API reference will link to the creating pages doc that @jonniebigodes found, which I think is a logical path for people to follow 🙂

14. `createPagesStatefully`

Similar to the `createPages` step, but for the [`createPagesStatefully` API](/docs/node-apis/#createPagesStatefully).

15. `onPreExtractQueries`

Calls the [`onPreExtractQueries` API](/docs/node-apis/#onPreExtractQueries) for your site and all plugins implementing it.

16. `update schema`

> Rebuilds the GraphQL schema, this time with `SitePage` context.

Reviewer: can you explain more what is a `SitePage` context? or add a link?

Reviewer 2: [this](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/creating-and-modifying-pages/) can offer some insight probably and address also the above comment.

Author: Add a link and a note!

17. `extract queries from components`

> All JavaScript files in the site are loaded and Gatsby determines if there are any GraphQL queries in them. If there are problematic queries they can be reported back with warnings or errors. All these queries get queued up for execution in a later step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All JavaScript files in the site are loaded and Gatsby determines if there are any GraphQL queries in them as exports. If there are problematic queries they can be reported back with warnings or errors. All these queries get queued up for execution in a later step.
```

i remember the name of the export is not interesting, and only one query per JavaScript file?

18. `write out requires`

> An internal Gatsby utility adds the code that files need to load/require.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An internal Gatsby utility which adds the code that files need to load/require.
```

19. `write out redirect data`

An internal Gatsby utility that adds code for redirects, like implemented with [`createRedirect`](/docs/actions/#createRedirect).

20. `Build manifest and related icons` - (from `gatsby-plugin-manifest`)

> This step is actually activated by `gatsby-plugin-manifest` in the `gatsby-default-starter` and is not a part of the built-in Gatsby functionality, demonstrating plugins are able to tap into the lifecycle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This step is activated by `gatsby-plugin-manifest` in the `gatsby-default-starter` and is not a part of the built-in Gatsby functionality, demonstrating how plugins are able to tap into the lifecycle.
```

21. `onPostBootstrap`

Calls the [`onPostBootstrap` API](/docs/node-apis/#onPostBootstrap) for your site and all plugins implementing it.

### Steps of the build phase

1. `run static queries`

> Static queries that were queued up earlier from query extraction are actually run so the data pages need can be provided to them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Static queries in [non-page components](/docs/building-with-components/#non-page-components) that were queued up earlier from query extraction are run to provide data to the components that need it.
```

2. `Generating image thumbnails — 6/6` - (from `gatsby-plugin-sharp`)

> Another step that is not a part of the built-in Gatsby functionality, but is the result of installing `gatsby-plugin-sharp`, which taps into the lifecycle. Sharp runs processing on images to create thumbnails of different sizes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another step that is not a part of the built-in Gatsby functionality, but is the result of installing `gatsby-plugin-sharp`, which taps into the lifecycle. Sharp runs processing on images to create image assets of different sizes.
```

3. `Building production JavaScript and CSS bundles`

Compiles JavaScript and CSS using webpack.

4. `Rewriting compilation hashes`

> Compilation hashes are used by webpack, and all files with page data need to be updated with the new hashes since they've been recompiled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Compilation hashes are used by webpack to keep the cache up to date, and all files with page data need to be updated with the new hashes since they've been recompiled.
```
A short explanation of why this is used would help: e.g. is it for invalidation of the cache or security purposes (or both)?

5. `run page queries`

> Page queries that were queued up earlier from query extraction are actually run so the data pages need can be provided to them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Page queries that were queued up earlier from query extraction are run so the data pages need can be provided to them.
```

6. `Building static HTML for pages`

> With everything ready for the HTML pages in place, HTML is rendered and written out to files so it can be served up statically. Since HTML is being rendered in a server environment, [references to browser APIs like window can break the build](/docs/debugging-html-builds/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With everything ready for the HTML pages in place, HTML is compiled and written out to files so it can be served up statically. Since HTML is being produced in a Node.js server context, [references to browser APIs like `window` can break the build](/docs/debugging-html-builds/) and must be conditionally applied.
```
Despite the commonly-used "SSR", rendering is confusing to use in reference to build time. Recommend "compiling", "producing", "combining", or something that doesn't tap into browser terminology.

## What do you get from a successful build?

> When a Gatsby build is successfully completed, everything you need to deploy your site ends up in the `public` folder at the root of the site. Included in it are minified files, transformed images, JSON files with information and data for each page, static HTML pages for each page, and more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a Gatsby build is successfully completed, everything you need to deploy your site ends up in the `public` folder at the root of the site. The build includes minified files, transformed images, JSON files with information and data for each page, static HTML for each page, and more.
```

> The final build is just static files so it can now be [deployed](/docs/deploying-and-hosting/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final build is just static files so it can now be [deployed](/docs/deploying-and-hosting/).

You can preview the static files with `gatsby serve` which serves the files from the `public folder`.
```

title: Life and times of a Gatsby build
---

import LayerModel from "../../www/src/components/layer-model"

<!-- written at the time of commit e85278c to bootstrap/index.js and commit f8cae16 to build.js -->

> _This is a high-level overview about the steps in the Gatsby build process. For more detailed information about specific steps you can find information in the [Gatsby Internals](/docs/gatsby-internals) section of the docs._

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_This is a high-level overview about the steps in the Gatsby build process. For more detailed information about specific steps, check out the [Gatsby Internals](/docs/gatsby-internals) section of the docs._
```

Gatsby has two modes for compiling a site:

1. Develop - run with the `gatsby develop` command
2. Build - run with `gatsby build`

You can start Gatsby in either mode with its respective command: `gatsby develop` or `gatsby build`.

## Build time vs runtime

A common confusion with the generation of [static](/docs/glossary#static) assets is the difference between [build time](/docs/glossary#build) and [runtime](/docs/glossary#runtime).

> Processes that happen in a web browser that you click through and interact with can be referred to as a _browser runtime_. JavaScript code can interact with the browser and take advantage of APIs it offers, such as `window.location` or injecting markup dynamically into the [DOM](/docs/glossary#dom). [Gatsby creates a JavaScript runtime](/docs/production-app) that takes over in the browser once the initial HTML has loaded.

Reviewer 4: I'm not 100% sure what audience we're trying to hit but
> such as `window.location` or injecting markup dynamically into the [DOM](/docs/glossary#dom)` seems a bit abstract

seems a bit abstract. Maybe we should add a real-life example like dropdown or an ajax from submit.. :shrug:

Author: I like that idea! I added the ajax form submission into this sentence.

> _Build time_, in contrast, refers to the process of using a server process to compile the site into files that can be delivered to a web browser later, so DOM APIs like `window` aren't available at that time.

Reviewer 4: Technically it's browser apis as DOM apis only refer to things like querySelector, .... Browser APIs are functions like fetch, serviceworker, ....
```suggestion
_Build time_, in contrast, refers to the process of using a server process to compile the site into files that can be delivered to a web browser later, so Browser APIs like `window` aren't available at that time.
```

- success start webpack server - 1.707 s — 1/1 6.06 pages/second
+ success Generating image thumbnails — 6/6 - 1.059 s
+ success Building production JavaScript and CSS bundles - 8.050 s
+ success Rewriting compilation hashes - 0.021 s
+ success Building static HTML for pages - 0.852 s — 4/4 23.89 pages/second
+ info Done building in 16.143999152 sec
```

_**Note**: the output of `gatsby develop` and `gatsby build` can vary based on plugins you've installed that can tap into the build lifecycle and the [Gatsby reporter](/docs/node-api-helpers/#reporter). The above output is from running the default Gatsby starter._

There is only one difference in the bootstrap phase where HTML and CSS is deleted to prevent problems with previous builds. In the build phase, the build command skips setting up a dev server and goes into compiling the assets.

By omitting these later steps, `gatsby develop` can speed up your ability to make live edits without page reloads using features like [hot module replacement](/docs/glossary#hot-module-replacement). It also saves time with the more CPU intensive processes that aren't necessary to perform in rapid development.

> A [cache](/docs/glossary#cache) is also used to detect changes to `gatsby-*.js` files (like `gatsby-node.js`, or `gatsby-config.js`) or dependencies. It can be cleared manually with the `gatsby clean` command to work through issues caused by outdated references and a stale cache.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A [cache](/docs/glossary#cache) is also used to detect changes to `gatsby-*.js` files (like `gatsby-node.js`, `gatsby-config.js`), or dependencies. It can be cleared manually with the `gatsby clean` command to work through issues caused by outdated references and a stale cache.
```
